[Sandi] This week...
If it doesn't set, it's a hot mess.
...puddings.
On fire, yeah. Yeah.
[Sandi] A steamy signature.
Ow, ow, ow, ow, ow, ow, ow. Hot.
[Sandi] A twisted Technical...
Everybody leaves
except for Julia.
[Sandi] ...and a multi-layered
Showstopper...
[Yan] Come on.
[Sandi] ...that turns bakers...
It's dribbling. It's dribbling loads,
it's look, look.
[Sandi] ...to jelly.
Massive disaster.
[Kate] It's like watching like
a horror film.
You don't want to watch it,
you can't peel your eyes away.
I don't like rubber. Disappointing.
[theme music playing]
[Sandi] Honestly, I can't believe the
high standards of the bakers this year
and some of them are so young.
Julia, 21, Liam, 19.
I know. They're just getting younger
and younger.
It's as if Paul's genetically breeding
them in the lab.
[Paul] Alfie, Frankie, it's all about
using your hands, all right.
You really go to push in there...
Anyway, dig in!
What's this for?
It's pudding week.
-Where'd you get that?
-I nicked it.
Halfway. If I can get to week seven,
I'd be chuffed.
Week eight. I'd be chuffed if I could get
to week eight.
I've been walking around with a big grin
on my face all week,
since getting Star Baker.
If anything it's made me, like,
want to work harder.
Pudding week.
I had a rubbish week last week so lots
to improve on.
[Sophie] It was very noticeable last week.
There's not much separating everybody.
Now I feel even more pressure.
[Yan] I'm totally scared,
anybody could go.
[Noel] Morning, bakers,
welcome to pudding week.
That is a sentence I've uttered many times
but now that I'm actually hosting
a baking show, it finally makes sense.
For your signature challenge,
Prue and Paul would like you to go back
to a time of assemblies and uniforms.
A time when Prue was in short trousers
and Paul had a very nice Aertex blouse,
because they want you to make
a steamed school pudding.
[Noel] Your school pudding must be served
with an accompaniment,
like a compote or a custard.
[Sandi] You've got three hours to get
steamy with your school puddings.
[both] On your marks, get set, bake.
[Liam] I love puddings.
Puddings with custard, ice cream.
About to see if I can make a good pudding.
What can go wrong? Oh, God.
[Paul] I loved steamed pudding.
I mean, it takes me back to
when I was at school.
It's all about that little
bit of sweetness,
and then the gorgeous texture
of a light sponge.
With custard, ah,
it's one of my favourite things ever
[Prue] Most bakers are very good
with things in the oven.
We're, this time, asking them to cook
something on top of the cooker.
It's extremely difficult to tell whether
the steamed pudding is cooking correctly.
[Paul] Anything that's got a little bit of
sogginess to it,
if it's a little bit stodgy,
it's a big no for me.
-Morning.
Sophie, tell us about your
steamed school pudding.
I am doing a fig, ginger
and honey steamed pudding,
and I'm going to serve it with a Tonka
mascarpone cream.
Sorry, a what?
-A Tonka bean.
-[Sandi] Does it smell?
Yeah, please?
[Sandi] Where'd you even get those?
Supermarket.
-We shop in very different shops.
-[laughs]
[Noel] Sophie's also adding an exotic
twist to her sponge,
soaking it with honey from Yemen,
served with a cream that should give
a flavour of Latin America.
[Paul] Spicy vanilla.
People either love it or hate it.
That's a very safe thing to do.
Whilst puddings can be stodgy,
you don't want them too stodgy.
The key thing to get right today,
is going to be the sponge.
[Sophie]
I've just whisked some egg whites,
and they're going into the batter.
Add some more air, it is hard to make
a steamed pudding airy.
[Steven]
We're avoiding stodge at all costs.
If I see this stodge trying to
creep into the tent, get out.
The thing is about stodge,
when you tell stodge to leave the tent
it will do it slowly.
[Noel] Scientist Yan, however, has a
stodge-avoiding strategy up her sleeve.
Instead of a third of flour,
I've put in a third breadcrumbs.
It lightens up the pudding.
[Sandi] To compliment her light texture,
she hopes to create an explosion
of fresh flavours by combining two
varieties of the same fruit.
[Yan] This is normal mango,
this is Alphonso, the best mango.
My God, it's so good!
I'm hoping it's going to work.
[Noel] Unlike Yan and Sophie,
the flavours in Kate's pudding,
couldn't get any more
quintessentially English.
[Kate] I've ground up some Early Grey Tea
and that will go into the sponge.
I'm making Mr. Darcy's steamy lake scene.
Ooh.
Mr. Darcy was never at my school. Sadly.
[Noel] Kate's adding a frisson of lemon
to the delicate bergamot flavour
in her Jane Austen-inspired pudding.
-Earl Grey, won't be lost in there?
-No, I'm hoping not.
I think that lemon will be
the overriding flavour.
Hopefully, I'll get the balance right.
Good luck.
[Noel] For two of the bakers, their love
of classic English flavours,
has led them down precisely the same
pudding lane.
[Liam] I love Cherry Bakewell.
When I was younger, me and my mum,
and my sister, we always used to go
to the corner shop, so then we would
always get the tinned version
of steamed puddings and our favourite
was the Cherry Bakewell version.
I love Bakewell tart.
My husband loves Bake...
We all love a Bakewell tart.
Stacey's doing a Bakewell.
I try not to pay that much attention.
See what happens, innit?
[Noel] To recreate the Bakewell pudding
of his youth,
nineteen year old Liam's
folding glacé and dried cherries
into an almond and lemon-infused sponge.
I want them to think that the combination
of flavours is good,
that the bake is good.
Yeah, I wanna nail both.
[Stacey] The most important thing is that
my pudding is light and fluffy.
It's gotta be the bomb,
it's gotta be perfect.
[Sandi] Stacey's cherries will flavour
the jam on top of her almond sponge
and in her bid to win the battle
of the Bakewells,
she's left nothing to chance.
Have you practised this?
I've done it 17 times.
-Seventeen times?
-I'd say about 17 times, yeah.
I wanted to get it absolutely perfect.
-Good luck.
-Thank you. Thank you very much.
See what happens on your 18th attempt.
Thank you.
I'm just lining the bowl
with orange slices.
These will cook with the sponge.
So they become really soft and you can
actually eat the orange
and the sponge altogether, so that makes
a bit like a marmalade-y sort of flavour.
[Sandi] James will also soak his sponge
in a ginger syrup
to try and bring to life the steamed
pudding of his boyhood dreams.
In junior school, we always had
a choice of either syrup pudding
or a marmalade pudding.
So this is a combination of both.
So, reminiscent of the school days.
[Julia] I never had
steamed pudding at school.
It was like, I don't know,
some baked apple with
cottage cheese inside.
It wasn't great.
[Sandi] Having missed out on a lifetime
of steamed puddings,
Russian-born Julia was forced to call on
her English in-laws for tips.
Treacle pudding, it's my husband Matt's
grandparent's favourite,
so I thought, I'll make that.
[Steven] I'm zesting lemons.
The flavours I've chosen are
quite classic, quite simple, but, erm,
I didn't wanna try to be too clever.
[Noel] A lemon sponge of blackcurrant
sauce might seem straight forward
but, being Steven,
it's here the simplicity ends.
Why have you got a syringe?
So we're going to take some of the liquid
from the compote,
inject little streaks into it.
-So you'll get a marbled effect?
-Almost marble-y.
-Alright, good luck. Look forward to it.
-Thank you.
[Sandi] Right, bakers, one hour gone,
two hours left.
[Sophie] I'm just lining the inside
of my pudding basin with slices of fig.
So when you turn it out,
they'll be on the outside.
Thing about steam pudding, you need to get
the right amount of mixture in the bowl.
Not too much, not too little.
I'm putting it in.
[Sophie] That takes just under two hours.
[Yan] Get it nice and bubbling away
and then I'll put it down to low.
So two hours.
[Stacey] Exactly an hour and a half.
Originally, I was doing two hours,
and then I went down to a 1.5 hours,
then I went down to one hour and 39.
Now it's an hour and a half.
It's just literally put it in
and leave it.
Absolutely not touching it.
It's a fatal mistake. Fatal.
Ooh.
Oh, no.
[Noel] As their puddings gather steam,
there's still sauces to start...
[Steven] This is a blackcurrant compote.
[Noel] ...and custards to concoct.
So, in the pan I've got some milk,
cream, and some cinnamon stick crushed up.
That's gonna go into a couple of eggs
and also some nice chocolate as well,
so we'll get a nice thick
chocolatey custard.
[Liam] My dream custard's thick.
You know when you pour it onto the cake,
you can't see the cake?
Like it's just like...
[makes popping noise]
I just wanna take it a little past runny,
because I don't want a thick,
gloopy custard, I want like a nice light
crème anglaise.
This is Earl Grey.
It's like the 19th century
was in the room.
-Yes. Hello, Liam.
-Yeah.
The thing about this is its kind of
a school pudding from the 70's
and I imagine they were probably extinct
by the time you went to school.
No. Steamed puddings did not exist
in my primary school.
So this is quite an odd challenge for you
cos it's sort of recreating
something historical.
Yeah. A little bit, it's a bit odd.
[Sandi] Unlike Liam, the steamed school
pudding and I go way back.
In fact, our formative years were spent
at the same institution,
Cambridge University.
Up until the 17th century,
the steamed pudding
was a far from sweet affair.
Comprised of an animal's stomach,
or even a bladder,
jam packed with meat and veg,
for the cooks at Cambridge,
mass pudding making
would've been an onerous task.
You put the contents in and then you tied
it up and then you boiled it,
and trust me, it really smells.
And, not only that, it's liable to break.
Obviously people from Cambridge came
and went and someone decided,
"Instead of using a sheep's bladder,
why not use a cloth?"
So you've got people replacing the meat
with suet, putting flour in,
but then also adding sugar.
[Sandi] Sugar would've been too expensive
for most folks in 1615,
but not for the scholars of Cambridge.
Adding this along with the flour and suet,
created a lighter, cake-like texture,
resulting in the Cambridge pudding.
[Sandi] And why can we date it
so specifically?
[Matthew] Because it comes in a book
printed in 1615.
Mince suet, new milk warm, fine sugar
and eggs as theory
and then as the practicality.
We need to make pudding.
Luckily I have all the ingredients
for a Cambridge pudding
the culinary historian, Dr. Sue Bailey,
tucked away in my old dorm room.
This looks absolutely fantastic!
Now, I'm desperate for your help, Sue.
-Go on, Sandi.
-I've got the recipe,
it was frankly unclear.
Mince suet, is that grated suet or...
[Sue] It is grated suet.
This is what has
actually been rendered down.
-I'm going to put all of this in.
-Fatty pudding.
[Sandi] Taken from round the loins
and kidneys of beef and mutton,
suet's a calorific fat,
perfect for satisfying hungry students,
whilst negating the need for meat.
[Sue] You now have to do a little
sort of dent in the middle,
cos otherwise you're not going
to be able to fit the butter in.
I've actually never seen this much butter
going into one thing.
And then we put them on top
of each other?
On top of each other.
Wow. Look at that.
I can actually feel my cardiovascular
system having a little seizure.
Hmm, it's nice, isn't it? [laughs]
[Sandi] Thanks to the clever cooks
of Cambridge,
the sweet steamed pudding was born
and sheep's bladders faded
from school menus
much to the relief of pupils
and dinner ladies across the nation.
Bakers, you have 30 minutes left.
Thirty minutes.
It's time to take it out
and I'm terrified.
If you open it
and it's sunk in the middle,
there is no going back from that.
You cannot hide it.
There's just no way of knowing.
I'm a bit worried.
[Steven] Three minutes.
[alarm clock rings]
Am I the only one who's taking it out?
Just so sick.
Someone else open it for me.
This is quite a moment.
[Noel] Is that hot?
Ow, ow, ow, ow, ow, ow, ow, ow.
Too scared to even do it.
I just want it to be good.
One fire, yeah! Yeah!
Good. I'm pleased with it.
Why don't you open it
and I'll tell you how good or bad it is?
-But please don't be mean.
-Okay.
Put the lid back on.
I'm joking, that's all right, isn't it?
[James] Please, please, please.
A little bit of sinkage in the middle.
[Liam] Phew, yeah, so far, so good.
Just need to...
You don't know till you turn it out
whether it's right or not.
Yes!
That is beautiful, it looks deep,
it looks pudding-like.
Oh, thank God for that!
[Julia] I'm happy with the way it looks.
Right, just serving it like that.
[chuckles]
Ta-dah! Looks alright. Mangoes are done.
[Sophie] More rustic than the kind
of thing I like to bake.
[gasps]
Oh, that's alright, nothing to see here.
[James] That happens every time I do it.
[laughs]
-How long we got?
-Bakers, you've got five minutes left.
[Sophie] It's not thickening.
I don't understand.
How long has it been on for?
-How can I help?
-You can't.
[Yan] Wow! That's the sort of thing you
inseminate cows with.
[Steven] I want that juice to be
all the way through inside.
I'm basically giving these
mangoes a shave.
[Stacey] I'm making a raspberry flower.
Look at that. That is the nuts that is.
I'm sorry. That is very good actually.
[Liam] Stand up.
It's not thickening, so what I'm doing
is putting more of the cornflour in.
Right, bakers, you have one minute
before we ring the school bell.
What a disaster.
Bakers, time is up. Pencils down.
The exam is over.
Please place your steamed school puddings
at the end of your desks.
Absolute disaster.
[birds chirping]
[Noel] Eight school puddings steamed
and served,
ready for examination by Paul and Prue.
I must say, it looks very pretty.
-[Prue] My mouth's watering.
-[chuckles]
That's not the lightest sponge
I've ever had.
On the other hand, you've got the
orange there, it is nice and marmalade-y.
[Noel] Paddington Bear will be pleased.
It's my pet name for Paul.
[laughs]
It is a little bit dense.
I wouldn't say it's
a great steamed pudding,
but it's a very good steamed pudding.
I'll take that.
-Well done.
-Thank you.
[Prue] Nice custard. Looks good.
The taste of the orange
and treacle together, it works.
Not the lightest sponge,
but it is delicious.
[Prue] Looks a little stodgy.
[Paul] This is going to be interesting
with the mascarpone cream.
That Tonka taste is very extraordinary
and rather good.
The flavour of the pudding is delicious.
The ginger and the fig
really work together, and the honey.
Still unsure about the Tonka bean.
-I love it. Just too stodgy.
-Yep.
I love the effect of the fruit sort of
falling down and the darkness
hitting the lemon sponge.
I think that really works.
-Looks very good.
-That sponge looks so light.
The blackcurrant is a nice little burst
of acidity.
[Paul] Should be sharp against
the mellow lemon of the sponge.
[Prue] It's really good.
It is a beautiful sponge,
it tastes amazing, it is light.
[laughing]
[all applauding]
-Well done, mate. Well done.
-[Steven] Thank you.
The custard's embarrassing.
[chuckles]
That's not custard,
that's a big mistake.
It's quite powerful
but I don't get the Earl Grey.
You've got Earl Grey fighting
against lemons,
it's gonna lose every day of the week.
It really looks good. It's dramatic.
It's beautifully designed.
[Paul] Held together well.
Nice consistency.
[Prue] That is good mango.
It's beautiful and light.
-[Prue] It's lovely.
-It's absolutely delicious.
-[Prue] Well done.
-Thank you. Oh, my God!
Two handshakes.
-Thank you, Yan.
-Thank you.
I think it's very pretty.
I love the cherries on the top.
Oh, that looks lovely and light.
Very almond-y, proper Bakewell flavour.
[chuckles]
-It's too stodgy.
-Okay.
You probably mixed it too much and the
gluten's got quite powerful.
That's why I couldn't give you
a handshake.
Do you want a Fielding fondle?
[laughing]
Don't leave me hanging.
[both laughing]
Looks quite attractive,
sponge looks pretty good.
[Prue] Oh, that looks really good.
Nice and light.
Absolutely delicious.
One of my favourite things is
a Bakewell Tart.
You have the texture of a Bakewell Tart
in there, which is very clever.
Cherries' got that sharpness
to it as well.
So overall, it's a very special thing.
It's absolutely delicious.
[gasps]
[chuckles]
-Thank you.
[clapping]
[Liam] So close.
So close.
I'm really happy and I got a handshake.
He really didn't want to give me one,
cos he's given two already.
Do you know what I mean?
Which makes it even more brilliant
that I got one.
I'm well chuffed.
Always was me custard?
What was that? That was embarrassing.
It was like some milk drink.
I don't think I'm looking forward
to the Technical that much.
Does anyone look forward
to a Technical Challenge?
Don't think they do.
[birds chirping]
[Sandi] Not only are the bakers about
to face the total unknown,
this week, it's a Technical with a twist!
Hello bakers, today,
your Technical Pudding Challenge
has been set by Mr. Paul Hollywood.
[Sandi] So, Paul, any advice before
you leave the tent?
It's all about the timing.
-Well, that's totally clear, I think.
-[laughs]
As you know, for this bit, Paul and Prue
are not allowed to stay.
We'll see them later. Off you go.
Right.
Today's Technical Challenge is staggering.
Because we are going to be staggering
your start time.
We're going to call you in one by one
and tell you what the challenge is
at your start time.
So, everybody leave, except for Julia.
-Out you come, come on.
-Off you go.
Good luck.
[Sophie] No messing about.
-You all right, Julia?
-No.
[laughs]
For today's Technical Challenge,
Paul would like you to make
six molten chocolate puddings
filled with peanut butter.
You have one hour
and at exactly that point,
you have to present
your bakes for judging.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
[both] Bake.
Melt the chocolate and butter together.
Whisk the eggs,
egg yolks and sugar together.
Combine the two mixtures.
I've done it once,
but it was such a long time
and it was just filled with chocolate
Okay, melt the chocolate
and butter together.
Let me show you something, Prue.
So what we've got
is a chocolate molten cake,
with a beautiful peanut butter filling
which oozes out when you cut it.
These are designed to be hot straight
from the oven.
So we're staggering the start
and we'll judge them live.
You bake these for ten minutes,
overbake then the whole mixture
will congeal
and you won't get that goo
when you cut it.
-It's gotta run.
-If they underdo it,
the whole thing will just collapse.
Do you know what? I think this is
a really tricky challenge.
And I will be astonished
if everybody produces perfection.
It is so weird being on my own.
I'm petrified, I'm absolutely petrified.
It's all about timing.
You have to serve it on the hour.
Right, baker number two,
for your Technical Challenge,
Paul would like you to make six molten
chocolate puddings
filled with hot peanut butter.
-You have one hour.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
-...bake.
Never made one, so I suppose actually
I've gotta, you know, really think about
when they go in the oven,
because they have to be, you know,
still runny in the middle.
Potentially they can still
carry on cooking... Oh, it's a minefield.
I'm just melting my chocolate
with some butter.
Well, at least I'm not on my own
right now, which makes it a bit better.
Hi. Does it?
-Does it actually make it better?
-No.
No, it doesn't.
Just gonna melt some chocolate,
just melt some chocolate.
[Sandi] Baker number three,
for your Technical Challenge,
Paul would like you to make
six molten chocolate puddings.
-You've got one hour.
-Bake!
I've never made them before.
I know what they look like.
Bum, bum, bum, bum, bum, bum.
What do I need?
I've got the butter and chocolate melting
and then I'm just about to start
whisking up eggs and sugar.
[Sophie] There's no raising agent
in this at all.
The raising comes from the whisked eggs.
[chuckles]
Yeah, you need lots of air in it.
I can't believe I'm doing it by hand.
Baker number four.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
Bake.
I have absolutely no idea.
I'm going with ribbon stage,
which means there should be little bit
of a trail left behind.
Everything you do,
you second guess yourself.
Should I really be doing it that way?
What’s that word I like, trepidatious?
[Sandi] Baker number five.
[Noel] You have one hour.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
...bake.
Oh, yeah, that’s okay.
I’ve made this before, similar.
Not peanut butter though.
It’s okay, got it.
What am I doing?
So, I’ve just whisked the eggs,
I’m trying to let the chocolate cool
a little bit more.
I just don’t like the idea of adding
hot chocolate to the cold eggs sugar mix.
Uh, oh, have I turned my oven on? Yes.
[Julia] I need to combine two together.
Doesn’t say anything
about how to combine, what to do.
-[Sandi] How’s it going?
-Yeah, it should be all right.
I just need to crack on really.
I don’t know what I’m doing...
You saying I’m in your way?
What you saying, Liam?
[Liam] I think I’m doing it right
but I’m not entirely sure.
Baker number six,
for your Technical Challenge
Paul would like you to make
six molten chocolate puddings.
-You have one hour.
-Bake!
I’ve never made a chocolate pudding
in my life. So, brilliant.
[Yan] So I just added
two tablespoons of flour.
I don’t wanna knock out air bubbles
so that’s why I’m folding it gently.
[Sandi] Baker number seven.
On your marks...
-Get set...
-...bake.
Never made them before in me life.
Fortunately, in revision last night,
I’ve briefly gone through
molten volcano cakes,
which is similar.
I’m a lot more confident
that I’m letting on.
[chuckles]
It said divide it between moulds.
I’m sort of starting out putting the sort
of same amount in each,
cos they will want them identical.
I’ve weighed them out,
dead on 100 grams in each pot.
Filled three quarters of the way up
and they’re gonna rise.
I don’t want them billowing over the top.
[Sandi] Baker number eight.
On your marks...
-Get set...
-...bake.
Not a clue.
[Julia] I’m just putting my peanut butter
inside of them.
Well, it says teaspoon,
but with a bit of an extra.
[Yan] Heaped teaspoon.
I’m having a terrible dilemma
at the moment.
My main problem is I’m not sure whether
I’m supposed to whisk that up to a frenzy
or not whisk it up a lot. But my heart
is telling me to really go for it.
But then again, my brain is telling me
maybe don’t go for it.
I think it’s a light folding.
Fingers crossed this is the
right way to do it.
[Yan] The plan is to chill it
in the freezer for 15 minutes.
When you cook it,
it makes it molten in the middle.
Got probably about ten minutes
in the freezer just to chill them down,
then it’s item six, bake.
Baking time, that’s what it’s all down to
and I have no idea...
-How long?
-...how long to do it for?
-Well, I've got an inkling.
-An inkling?
Got an inkling
and I think it's not very long.
[Sandi] The undisclosed bake time
for Paul’s recipe is ten minutes.
I’ve got 20 minutes left.
I’m going to bake them for I’m not sure...
[whispers] Twelve minutes.
You don’t want them overbaked,
so I’ll probably give them like 20...
Fifteen minutes... Oh, I don’t know.
No idea. No idea.
Eight minutes.
I’m gonna say it’s probably
about 35 minutes.
Erm, obviously I don’t
want them to be raw.
Oh, you’re kidding me.
Oven wasn’t on. Come on.
Eight more minutes, 15 left,
eight more minutes
Twenty-five minutes.
They’re going in now.
They can heat up with the oven.
[James] The key thing with baking
is that you want the outside crispy
so it holds the gooey centre.
[Yan] One hundred eighty for ten minutes.
I[James] f you go too far you’ll just get
a rock hard sponge,
too little it’s just gonna splodge,
so you just need the right balance
because it can be tricky.
[beeping]
[Stacey] They really should be in now.
I didn’t wanna be early
but now I think I’m late.
It’s a waiting game now.
Come on, you can do this.
[thunder rumbling]
Baker number one,
you’ve got one minute left.
I don’t think they’re done.
[Sandi] As ever in a Technical Challenge,
Paul and Prue will blind taste the bakes.
Baker number one, your time is up
and I’m gonna come and collect
your molten chocolate puddings.
-Baker number one.
-Ah, thank you.
These actually look very neat,
-don’t they?
-[Prue] Don't they?
[Paul] Let's have a look.
[Prue] Oh, it's good.
Look at the texture of the peanut,
it’s soft still, pouring out.
[Prue] Isn't it? That's good.
I have no idea what they’re saying.
I can’t hear anything.
[Paul] Just have a quick taste.
Could’ve done with a touch more filling,
but I must say, it’s not bad.
Baker number two, your time is up.
Thank you very much, waiter.
Very neat again, bit of a wobble,
which is good.
We need to really get into it.
[Prue] Oh, look at that.
[Paul] Look at that.
[Paul] Now you’re talking.
[Prue] That’s more peanut butter.
That’s what makes the difference.
And it's good.
They look good,
flavour of the chocolate’s good.
That’s excellent.
I saw a lot of nodding.
Baker number three, I am coming
to collect your molten chocolate puddings.
I know they’re under, so under.
I mean, you’ve got a little bit of goo.
Let’s have a taste of it and see.
Hmm, it’s very good.
The sponge is excellent.
The texture’s pretty good as well.
I just think if they’d put more peanut
butter in it would’ve been better.
[Prue] Absolutely.
[Steven] They’re coming out.
-Time is up.
-That’s wonderful news.
I’ll be gentle with them.
[Prue] They look...
[Paul] Oh, they look perfect, don’t they?
I think these are going to be excellent.
[Paul] Oh it’s quite solid.
[Prue] Oh. Not quite runny enough.
[Paul] Slightly over, aren’t they?
[Prue] What a pity.
I thought we had a winner here.
[Sandi] Baker number five,
your time is up.
Wow! Gotta be careful
how you serve that one.
[Sandi] Baker number five.
[Paul] Thank you very much.
[laughs]
If you’re gonna serve a cake,
serve it phallic.
Oh, it’s not cooked.
[Paul] It is under baked.
[Prue] If you like undercooked...
-Chocolate sponge.
-...cake mixture,
-you’d like it.
-Yeah.
I’ve overcooked these.
Oh, they look horrible.
Baker number six, your time is up.
If you dropped them,
it wouldn’t be a disaster.
[laughs]
Wish them luck.
Enjoy.
[Prue] I don’t think we will.
[Paul] Oh, dear.
It's cracked.
They're quite solid.
-Oh, yeah, they are.
-Let's have a look.
Yeah, see? Massively overbaked.
[Kate] It’s like watching, you know,
like a horror film
You don’t wanna watch it,
you can’t peel your eyes away.
It looks pretty dreadful, really.
Right. Baker number seven,
your time is up.
One collapsed
cos I threw it down too hard.
At least I know it’s soft in the middle.
[Paul] Okay, this has got a few issues
with getting it out of the mould.
This one’s broken, this is dipping,
that’s got a big air hole in.
Let’s cut this one.
Yeah, that’s absolutely raw, look.
[Paul] And so is this one.
That’s raw as well.
It’s, erm, a bit of a failure.
Yeah, they’re a bit burnt.
Baker number eight, your time is up.
[Stacey] God Almighty.
[Prue] Thank you.
[Noel] Voila!
[Prue] There’s not a lot
of middle is there?
It looks slightly overbaked to me.
This is horrible.
I just don't want to be last.
[Paul] They taste okay.
The chocolate’s good.
I’m a little bit worried
about folding of the mix
because there are little
air pockets and cracks.
Sophie, what are they saying?
There’s just not enough middle.
-No.
-Not enough peanut butter.
It’s good but it’s just not perfect.
[Noel] Prue and Paul will now rank
the molten puddings
from the worst to the best.
In eighth place, who’s that?
Oh, that’s me.
[Prue] Kate, that’s you.
Well, they’ve collapsed, haven’t they?
In seventh place it’s this one.
James, it wasn’t baked enough
cos all the chocolate was still
coming out with the peanut butter.
[Noel] In sixth place it’s Yan.
Fifth is Steven and Stacey is fourth.
In third spot is this one.
Pretty good, actually, Julia.
I just think that you could’ve done
with a little bit more peanut butter
in there and it would’ve flooded out.
And in second place, this one. Who’s that?
Liam, well done,
they really are excellent.
And first place is this one.
[all applauding]
Well done.
Awesome. Yay. Thank you.
[Sophie] I’m pleased, actually.
I needed this.
And it’s put me in a much better position
going forward to tomorrow.
[Liam chuckles]
That was just sick. Yeah, ooh.
Oh, a little bit gutted.
New day tomorrow.
[Kate] I’m not beating meself up about it.
It’s not the end of the world,
it’s a pudding.
[birds chirping]
[Noel] It’s the Showstopper.
One last chance to prove they’re worthy
of Star Baker
or simply that they deserve to stay.
[Sandi] Right, my gorgeous judges.
Three handshakes,
that’s a personal best for you.
[Paul] When Stacey, Steven,
Yan create something
that is pure magic and perfection...
-You’ve gotta give a handshake.
-...I’ve gotta give them a handshake.
Who, for you, is in trouble this week?
James is in trouble. I adore James,
I really don’t want him to mess up,
but he just could.
[Paul] I think Kate as well.
[Prue] Kate was Star Baker last week
but I think she is in trouble.
She was bottom of Technical.
So coming into the Showstopper,
she really has to pull out all the stops.
But if you’re in the middle you
could go up or down.
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
You totally understood mathematics
and I like that about you.
I know. I didn’t even go to school.
Heart’s beating, yeah.
Morning, bakers,
hope you had sweet pudding dreams.
Now for your Showstopper today,
Prue and Paul would like you to make
an ornamental trifle terrine.
You’ll need three things.
A baked element, a set custard,
or a mousse and a jelly.
Without those three things,
it’s just chaos.
[Sandi] And everyone must want a slice.
The slice needs to look as good
as the whole.
[Noel] You got four and a half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
Bake!
Four and a half hours
seems like a lifetime
but I know it’s gonna rapidly go.
The Showstopper Challenge today,
it’s all about textures,
definitive layers, and beautiful flavours.
The jelly is going to be
the most difficult bit,
because it has to be firm enough
to be sliced but not to be rubbery.
This is a masterclass in gelatine
cos if you don’t set the jelly,
the whole thing will collapse
when you bring it out.
Starting off with the raspberry jelly
cos that’s the first layer,
so that needs to go into the freezer
as quickly as possible.
[Liam] I’m just squeezing out my oranges
for my jelly.
[Sandi] In the topsy-turvy world
of terrines,
the bottom layer becomes the top.
I’m making pineapple, rum,
and mint jelly.
[Sandi] So getting it set early
is a priority.
I’m just soaking some leaf gelatine.
I’m using powdered gelatine, it gives it
like a really illuminous orange,
if it sets.
This is the lemon and lime jelly.
It’s gonna be blue,
so I’m gonna add a blue liqueur.
Cos I decided to do a hidden design
I have to use a lot of gelatine
which can make things a bit rubbery.
We’ll find out.
[Noel] Steven’s American flag trifle
will have raspberry jelly
with white chocolate
and coconut custard stripes.
His stars should
magically appear when sliced.
How are you gonna do that?
Layering blue jelly
and then pipe rows of stars
with white chocolate butter sugar mix.
When you cut it, you should get
the stars and stripes.
Wow! How many stars
are you actually gonna put on?
Well, I’ve been to nine states in America,
so I’m doing nine.
I’m really looking forward
to seeing how this turns out.
Me too.
[Sandi] Steven’s not the only baker flying
the flag for trifle.
I’m just laying out the fruit
in the Union Jack pattern.
I call it the missed
Silver Jubilee terrine.
When I was about six I missed the
street party that we had outside the house
cos I had chickenpox.
Mum, brought me up a trifle
and that’s all I remember
about the Silver Jubilee,
a rubbish day, basically.
[Sandi] James’ regret-tinged trifle
will layer Swiss roll, Eton mess mousse
and raspberry panna cotta, topped with
a fruity Union Jack in prosecco jelly.
When you cut a slice,
you’ll just see stripes?
Yes, so it should be red, white, blue.
Then you won’t see
the Union Jack any more?
-Yeah.
-Well, good luck.
[Sandi] It’s not just James
whose patriotic spirit
has been stirred
by the great British trifle.
My terrine is called Heart of a Hero.
Dad, was in the royal navy,
stationed in Hong Kong,
he was then allowed to bring his family
over to the UK.
It’s about him risking everything.
Mum and Dad
risking everything to come over.
[Noel] Encircled by chocolate cityscapes,
Yan’s trifle will sandwich sponge
with strawberry
and white chocolate mousses,
crowned with an ambitious jelly poppy.
I’ve set jelly aside, just clear.
Use the syringe to inject the red jelly,
let it set and then the black coloured--
-Middle.
-Yeah.
-Very clever.
-Well, let's see if it works.
-Good luck.
-Thank you.
Right, this can go in the fridge
to start chilling.
Let's get this baby in the freezer.
The last layer of blue
is just chilling out.
Then we’re gonna start with
the red, white, red.
That’s my raspberry mousse.
This is my Eton mess layer.
So I’m making the strawberry mousse.
Whipped up the cream, melted a packet
of strawberry jelly
and then pureed 200 grams of strawberries
and then pushed it through a sieve.
Just adding my yuzu to my custard.
The idea for this was just borne
from a flavour.
It’s a citrus fruit.
They use it a lot in Japan.
I’m fascinated by Japanese patisserie,
I love it.
[Sandi] Sophie's yuzu flavour will run
through her sponge and custard
with a hidden core of yuzu curd
and raspberry mousse.
[Prue] How are you
gonna get that in there?
So that’s actually already in the freezer,
so I’ve got a mini version of this.
This mould, what’s it called?
This is a bûche mould.
Mighty Boosh mould?
-I’m looking and I think it is.
-The Mighty Boosh and the mini bûche.
I’m very excited.
Right, I think we better ferme our bouche
and go. Thank you very much indeed.
[Liam] Right, so let’s make a sponge.
[Julia]
I’m making my raspberry and almond sponge.
I’m not mucking about with the pink today,
I’m going for it.
This is a Savoiardi sponge which is
made with sort of lady finger biscuits.
This is going right at the bottom.
[James] It needs to be a decent thickness.
I think the key importance of this is
keeping the strata.
So you don’t want it to sink into
the bow layer.
But it’s not as thick
as I’d like it to be, but let’s just see.
Just love this colour.
[Noel] Stacey’s flamboyant sponge will
join layers of rum and pineapple jelly,
passion fruit Eton mess and mango mousse
laced with chilli,
all perched on a coconut biscuit base.
Okay, I’m trying to get my head around it.
[Prue] So, five layers.
Yes, but there’s also
going around the outside
fuchsia pink passion fruit meringues.
Wow!
I think this sounds like Stacey.
It’s ambitious,
there’s about 20 different things to do.
So I’m putting them on 170 degrees
for like half an hour.
Get it baked.
Ten to 12 minutes.
-[Noel] But sponge...
-Right.
...isn’t everyone’s cup of tea.
I’ve got brown butter brownies.
It’s inspired by my friends at uni.
Whenever we have a break or whatever
we always have brownies
and like Chai latte.
Chai latte.
Yeah, yeah, it was really popular
in university last year. What?
[Sandi] Liam’s ode to student life will
layer orange jelly, chai latte panna cotta
and chocolate mousse on top
of his brownie base.
I love the idea of the flavours.
[Paul] Chai latte.
I go to a very like artsy-like university.
I did actually go to art school myself,
so did you, Noel.
So did I.
So you’re speaking to two art
students here.
We invented the chai latte.
[laughs]
[Sandi] Not everyone’s trifles
are quite so trendy.
Going for traditional trifle. I’ve got my
great, great nan to thank for this recipe.
[Sandi]
As with any good old-fashioned trifle,
raspberry will flavour Kate’s
meringue cream sponge and jelly
with a layer of thick set
powdered custard.
Well, these are classic flavours.
Sometimes you can’t move too far away
from tradition. Keeping it simple.
[Noel] One hour gone.
[Steven] Sponge, coming out the oven.
Should be perfect.
[Steven] Beautiful.
[Stacey] It’s the most amazing pink,
isn’t it?
[Steven] Is the jelly set?
My orange jelly’s not setting as fast
as it normally does.
At home, it takes like half an hour
to freeze over,
but I don’t know what’s going on now.
It’s set.
It’s taking ages.
And like magic.
I’m just soaking sponge
in the fruit juice,
so when I turn it out
I’ve got a lovely colourful trifle.
[Sandi] Julia’s vanilla and liqueur soaked
summer fruit sponges
will surround passion fruit jelly
topped with chocolate mousse.
Are trifles popular in Siberia?
I’ve never in my life seen trifle.
What’s trifle then in Russian?
I don't know.
Bakers, you have had half the time
for your ornamental trifle terrines.
The jelly just hasn’t set.
[Steven] Right, raspberry jelly.
There’s a lot to do. Now I’m moving on to
the chai latte panna cotta.
I'll see what happens. Let me not panic.
I’m just getting started on the Eton mess.
When I practised it, the Eton mess
has been a mess.
I’m not a big fan of trifles,
back to the sad day
when I couldn’t go to the Silver Jubilee.
What’s next?
I’m doing my custard next.
Just adding my yuzu custard.
Coconut custard, quite unconventional.
This has got custard powder in. Can’t have
a trifle without custard powder.
Shocking ingredient.
Do you like making these terrines?
No, not really. You know, any future
husband better not be getting ideas
off this, if I ever get married,
which, you know, is highly unlikely
at this stage but...
-Why?
-I don't know.
Like this is a conversation...
Seriously, you cook.
You cook and you’re a blacksmith.
That’s like the perfect combination.
Am I going red?
You are, darling, I don’t think
this is the best way for you to pull.
[laughs]
Bakers, one and a half hours left
on your trifle terrines.
I am actually ahead of time.
We are... We’re halfway up the flag.
I’m making a thin coconut biscuit
to finish off.
This is the white chocolate bavarois,
which is gonna envelope the insert.
[Liam] Chocolate mousse, the layer that
could make or break my terrine.
This is gonna be a mango,
lime, and chilli mousse.
There’s mango, lime and chilli in there
and then I’m going to be putting cream in.
I’m just making my Swiss roll.
The red sponge, cos obviously we want it
to match the colour of the flag.
Just worried it's not pink enough.
Done.
Let’s get this in the freezer.
Let it set.
[alarm beeping]
All done. Now it’s a waiting game.
Bakers, you’ve got half an hour
to put that welly in your jelly.
The terrine’s in the freezer,
so decorations in the meantime, really.
You’ve certainly hit the eighties.
[Yan] That’s the plan.
Chocolate skyline of Hong Kong
and London.
Build the future.
-In chocolate?
-In chocolate.
Totally.
I’m just making my topping. Oh.
Massive disaster and I’ve forgotten
the sugar in my biscuits.
No sugar, gotta do it again.
It’s funny, isn’t it? As soon as you get
in the tent you just ruin it.
I’ve gotta pipe the poppy.
So this is gelatine I’m just colouring in.
Spot the scientist.
I’m just putting some silver leaf onto the
little meringue crown.
I can do it better than that.
I’m gonna make another one.
Come on, I can do this.
[Stacey] All I have to do is take
the terrine out of its mould
with a cool biscuit underneath.
But the biscuit isn’t cool because
it’s in the oven now. Bit of a problem.
Amazing.
It’s called Heart of a Hero.
That’s my dad’s heart, he’s a hero.
That’s so clever dude.
I’m just waiting for my terrine to set.
Finger’s crossed it will come out firm
or a nice wash.
You can imagine [blows raspberry]
[Sandi] Happy with it?
Can’t really tell until it’s unmoulded.
Aw, it’s nerve racking.
Really soft, so I’m just gonna
prepare it really gently.
Come on.
I feel sick.
Come on, you can do this.
Oh, wow! That’s beautiful.
The jelly’s set.
Not great. It hasn’t quite frozen solid.
Fifteen minutes left.
Fifteen minutes only.
Make or break.
That's my girl.
I’m trying to get it as smooth
as possible.
It’s dribbling. It’s dribbling.
It’s dribbling loads. Just look, look.
It’s an absolute mess.
-Stop panicking.
-It’s dribbling and it’s a mess.
Really need them to speed up.
I’m stressing out.
It’s not gonna set.
Someone tell me it’s gonna be fine.
That is dripping, it’s dripping.
It’s fine. It’s all fine. It’s all fine.
Ugh.
Bakers, you have one minute left.
Ta-dah! Oh!
Bakers, that is the end of your
Showstopper Challenge.
Done.
Are you okay? Are you alright there?
It’s my orange terrine.
[exhales]
Sophie, please bring up your
ornamental trifle terrine.
It’s wonderful that you’ve got your
pink sausage in the middle.
Yeah.
I like the look of it. I love the colours.
Wow, drops really lovely.
[Prue] Well, that worked.
Beautiful.
The slice is pretty, a very good slice.
And that yuzu really comes through.
That’s absolutely delicious.
-Brilliant.
-[Prue] Really good.
The sponge, the bavarois,
the mousse, the jelly.
I think altogether you created something
very pretty, very high class.
Terribly delicious.
Amazing, isn’t it?
I actually love it. And she’s got
the gelatine to create the poppy.
It’s very clever.
The strawberry mousse is a triumph.
But who doesn’t like strawberry mousse?
The custard. I think you’ve got
a little bit too much gelatine in there.
It’s just set on the wrong side of firm
but it looks incredible.
Thank you.
[Prue] Well, it’s certainly jolly.
The pink is proper pink, isn’t it?
Yeah.
[Prue] Well, the slice is pretty,
isn’t it?
[Paul] Yeah.
This is spot on.
The lime, the mint, the chilli.
Who would have a chilli in a trifle?
But it works, that little heat at the end
is fascinating.
The biscuit down the bottom is delicious,
meringues around the outside,
again, genius.
I think you’ve come up with something
that’s truly unique and tastes beautiful.
It’s neat, it’s clean,
there’s stark lines.
The difference in colour is phenomenal.
The jelly is very nice and tart
and really raspberry.
It’s delicious. The custard takes
me back a few years.
I used a bit of custard powder.
Me Nan used to do something
very similar to that.
It’s very good.
[Prue] Does look a bit firm.
It’s too firm on all of it.
White chocolate is very sweet.
The best bit is the prosecco jelly
on the top.
All the other layers
are not carrying much flavour.
It’s a bit sickly.
Overall, I think the appearance
is all right actually.
I’m fascinated to see
what it’s like inside.
Don’t think the jelly works,
funnily enough,
although I love passion fruit.
It almost tastes watery.
The passion fruit isn’t
strong enough for me.
The texture and everything is okay.
That soggy sponge though I just don’t get.
It’s a shame.
Oh, look at that.
[clapping]
[Noel] Wow!
[Prue] Isn’t that fantastic?
It’s very clever.
[Prue] The stars are amazing.
[Prue] Hmm.
The coconut flavour’s lovely.
It’s a little tough.
Hmm, disappointing.
I don’t like rubber
and it is,
it’s too much gelatine in there.
I think you’ve gone for appearance
rather than textures.
It's not good.
It's a shame, cos it looks amazing.
Everyone’s had a style over substance
at least once.
I think it’s a bit clumsy
and the jelly’s not set..
Yeah, I... Yeah.
[Paul] Wow! It’s like water
that jelly, innit?
It’s just...
I do get the chai.
Chai latte, panna cotta is delicious.
Chocolate brownie is quite tough
and your jelly is a disaster.
[exhales]
I’d like to stay in but I think
I’m in the danger zone,
but there’s a few of us who are
quite worried, I think, tonight.
I hope I will be here next week,
but I really don’t think so.
[Liam] I just hope
they see it was just a blip.
I just hope they see past it.
[sighs]
Right, who’s vying for the top place?
I thought Sophie’s was delicious.
If you walked into a Michelin starred
restaurant and had that,
you wouldn’t argue it.
It’s absolutely superb.
[Sandi] What about Stacey?
[Paul] Very clever.
Every layer was good.
She’s definitely a contender.
What about Kate, has she saved herself?
I think she has saved herself. It’s not
the first time that Kate’s done that.
The whole thing together as one
when you eat it is absolutely delicious
and actually quite elegant too.
The one who I wanted to weep for
is Liam.
It’s all too clumsy.
I sort of weep for him as well.
He can do better than that.
He knows that as well.
The other one
who I think is in trouble is James.
Fantastic jelly, problem for me
is every other element was wrong.
Julia’s was really disappointing.
She had a passion fruit jelly
with very little flavour.
Julia, yeah she’s, erm,
put herself into a bit of trouble.
Well, you’ve got a lot to decide.
Meanwhile, we’ll just
double-check that this is a...
-Yeah. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa!
-You know...
Right, bakers,
I get the best job of the week
cos I get to announce the Star Baker.
The Star Baker this week is the baker
whose terrine
the four of us have literally just
finished off cos it was so delicious.
The Star Baker is Sophie.
[all clapping]
Which means that I’ve got the horrible job
of revealing who’s leaving us.
The person that
we have to say goodbye to is...
James.
I’m sorry, mate.
I’m sorry.
That's all right.
[sobbing]
Thanks, Paul.
-I’m all for you, buddy.
-Yeah.
My time has come.
It’s gutting.
I wanted to do this to put myself against
other really good bakers
to see how good I was.
To be part of that’s been
really humbling.
[Prue] We will miss James in the tent.
Julia was sobbing her eyes out
and who was comforting her?
Don’t get me going. I’m not crying.
And that’s typical of James.
He’s just such a nice guy.
Oh, thank you very much.
That was delicious.
It was the Showstopper.
Sophie stepped up to the plate
and produced one of those bakes
that you just wanna go back for again
and again and again and again.
Yes, Star Baker.
I will try and enjoy the moment
before I start thinking about next week.
But, yeah, I’m really chuffed.
-Are you okay?
-Yeah.
It was really important that
I did well yesterday, cos if I didn’t...
All I need to do next week is just
pick myself back up
and just keep on going upwards.
That’s how I’m gonna do it.
That’s the plan. That’s the plan.